# csc346 1-29-19

### analog vs digital
- analog is continuous (i.e. no. of colors)
- digital is finite (i.e. no. of digits in base 10)

## Digital logic design
Operates on discrete digital signals (discrete as in finite).
- digital signals (values)

## analog
Operates on continuous values

## Why choose digital over analog?
Because digital is finite, it is easily programmable.

A digital system is not sensitive to noise; it is a controlled environment.

Size and cost is much more affordable than analog.

## Number systems
- decimal system - base 10
- binary system - base 2
- octal system - base 8 
- hexadecimal system - base 16

## sizes
- bit
- nibble - 4 bits
- byte - 8 bits
- word - 2 bytes
- double word - 4 bytes

## number expansion (polynomial expansion)
```
∑ a_i * r^i
```

When converting between bases, the last digit generated will be the most signifacnt bit.

## converting fractional numbers
- multiply by base
- use integer for digit in new base
- leading bit is first digit generated 

## converting base 2 to octal
Break into sets of 3 bits (start from lsb)
```
10101100010001_2 = 25421_8
		  |1_8|
```

## adding bits
```
	1001
	0111 +
	------
	0000
```
^ there is an overflow bit that has been discarded.

# subtracting bits
```
	1001
	0111 -
	------
	0010
```

## range
n-bits can represent 0 to 2^n-1

## signed magnitude
- 1 - negative
- 0 - positive

1's complement will negate number (useful for subtraction by addition)
- flip the bits only

2's complement - flip the bits and add 1
- subtraction through addition - difference does not need to be flipped

# BCD (binary coded decimal)
- represented in 4 bits
```
129_10 = 10000001_2
	   = 0001 0010 1001 _bcd

10_10 = 1010_2
	  = 0001 0000 _bcd
```
Each individual digit represented in binary.

