# CSC 332 2-11-19

## memory allocation methods

### first-fit
First free partition large enough is where memory is allocated. Jobs will have to wait.

### best-fit
Size of job is compared with size of *all* partitions. Least waste partition is used.

Example:
```
Job List
-------
j1 - 690k
j2 - 275k
j3 - 760k
```

```
Mem. partitions
---------------
p1 - 900k
p2 - 910k
p3 - 300k
```
Allocation:
```
parts | FF      | BF
------------------------
p1     j1/210    j1/210
p2     j2/635    j3/150
p3     -         j2/25
------------------------
waste  845       385
```
*Best fit* wastes less memory.

If a job is too big for a partition, partitions must be resize. This is a disadvantage of *fixed partition memory.*

Lower addresses of memory will be used more often than others in first fit.

### next fit
This will use a circular list. It will start searching for *first fit* after last location of allocation.

Example:
```
Job list
ja 57k
jb 920k
jc 50k
jd 701k
```
```
Memory partitions
p1 900k
p2 910
p3 200
p4 300
```
Allocation:
```
parts  | FF | BF | NF
----------------------
p1       ja  jd    ja 
p2       jc  -     jc
p3       -   ja    -
p4       -   jc    -
```
Fixed partition allows only 1 job per partition.

### Dynamic mem. allocation
Whole memory is not partitioned. Program is loaded into memory at next available address (i.e. after last program's highest address).

Internal fragmentation occurs in fixed memory allocation.

Since all programs have different amount of time to run, there will still be "holes" in memory as some jobs finish before others.

### worst fit (dynamic mem.)
The partition where the moste waste occurrs is used; this essentially partitions that location in memory, leaving room for the next program.

Example:
```
Jobs
j1 200
j2 300
j3 300
j4 200
```

```
Memory
p1 350
p2 350
p3 450
```
Allocation:
```
parts | FF | BF | WF
-------------------------
p1      j1   j1   j2
p2      j2   j2   j3
p3      j3   j3   j1, j4
```

External fragmentation occurs with dynamic mem. allocation. External fragments can be used.

### memory deallocation
For static mem., a partition must me marked as free.

For dynamic mem., adjacent free memory must be combined with newly-freed memory.

Meaning, a location "sandwhiched" by free memory will make for a larger free location.
