# csc 332 2-4-19

## Memory mgmt. - single partition allocation

All computer memory was available for use

A program would include everything needed. i.e., managing peripherals

Programs were not so efficient.


```
memory
+------------+
|			 |
| Program	 |
|			 |
|			 |
+------------+
```
Later on:
```
memory
+----------------+
|			     |
| Program +      |
| std. functions |
|			     |
|			     |
+----------------+
```
(This is still not considered an OS).

Early on, the operating system could be controlled entirely by user.

```
memory
+----------------+
|        OS      |
|			     |+-------+
|			     ||       |<--- limit register
|----------------|+-------+
|			     |
|   User program |
|			     |
+----------------+
```
^ this separation is important:

In a big computer (like a mainframe), most users will just rent time. Users must be separated.

### Limit register
This is a special register. CPU instruction addresses are compared against limit register address to prevent OS overwrite.

---

Instruction set
```
+-------------+
| OS executed | <--- user cannot use
|-------------|
|             |
+-------------+
```

OS executed instructions, such as system interrupts.

This is to prevent full control over things like devices.

Modes of operation: operating system and user mode.

---
PSW - program status word (IBM) : a special register
```
+-----+-+-------------+
|     | |             |
+-----+-+-------------+
	   ^
	  Bit indicates mode
```

Once user executes instruction, the PSW bit is changed, and the OS will go to SVC (supervisor code); this code can control everything (like give back control to user).

SVC is jumped to via function call.

---
### OS uses interrupts

When external devices communicate with computer, they cannot just issue CPU instructions because of how they are slowed by mechanical components.

i.e. printer: CPU sends one char at a time, which is slow. CPU would then have to wait for printer.

External devices have special register with a "ready bit", which will say when a device is ready to accept data.

The signal from device will interrupt CPU.
- interrupt may say that other devices can interrupt CPU or not.

### interrupt vecotrs
Interrupt instruction in OS partition.

Machine code
```
+----------+-----------+
| Op. Code | address   |
+----------+-----------+
```
Old way: In a program, request and use any physical address; this is no longer allowed.

### Relative addresses in memory
- absolute address: full address
	- i.e., peoples addresses in a room
- relative address
	- i.e., if the room is moved, the addresses will remain the smae
	- a relative address must be converted to abs. address (physical address) for CPU.

The *loader* will recalculate all relative addresses as absolute.
- This is NOT good enough for mem. mgmt.: whenever there is a problem, this program will need to be reloded.
- Physical address is not calculated by LOADER then, but calculated during exec. time.

---

### binding times
```
Source program
	  |
	  v
  COMPILER			|
	  |				| Compile
	  v				| time
 obj. module		|
	  |
	  v
LINKAGE EDITOR  (for combination of obj. modules)   |
	  |												|
	  v												| Load 
  LOAD MODULE 										| time
	  |												|
	  v												|
	LOADER  <--- system libs. 						|
	  |												|
	  v
EXECUTABLE CODE <--- dynamically loaded sys. lib.   | execution time (runtime)
```

When is physical address resolved? This is called *binding*.
- this can happen at compile if given phy. address
- load time is better but not best
- during execution time

The cpu we will be using I8086 (intel).
- max. mem. size was 1mb.
- size of registers: 16 bit

### cpu handling of code segment (CS)
- CS register is 16 bits
- instruction (op. code and address) is shifted over 4 bits.

Future mem. mgmt. depends on runtime exec.
