# csc 332 3-11-19

## Scheduling

Execution Time consists of
- CPU time for program exec.
- Time for IO ops.
	- may involve external device that is slower than exec., therefore significant time
- Waiting in ready queue

Scheduling time is defined by nature of device, not by algorithm used.

The only part we can influence of scheduling is "waiting in ready queue".

### Parameters
- CPU utilization
	- we want the CPU to be busy all the time
	- best case: CPU utilized 90%
- Throughput
	- jobs completed per time unit
	- this param. will show the overall performance of the system
- turnaround time
	- characteristic of a single program. Consists of:
		- waiting to get into memory
		- waiting in ready queue
		- exec IO
- waiting time
- response time

### Goals of scheduling algorithm
- maximize
	- throughput
	- CPU efficiency
- minimize
	- response time
	- turnaround time
	- waiting time

### Preemptive scheduling algorithm
- OS decides how long program runs
- OS can interrupt whenever it wants

### non-preemptive scheduling algorithm
- Program can only be interrupted if it requests it

## Algorithms

### First come first serve
- programs are executed in order of arrival

```
Job2
Job1
Job3
```

When first program comes, a program control block is created.

A pointer to the program control block is stored in ready queue.

This method is *non-preemptive*.

| jobs | CPU time | turnaround time |
| - | - | - |
| Job2 | 15ms| 15-0 = 15ms |
| Job1 | 2ms | 17-0 = 17ms
| Job3 | 1ms | 18-0 = 18ms

For scheduling, the amount of time for exec. does not need to be known, only moment of arrival.

### shortest job next
- non-preemptive method

| jobs | a | b | c | d |
| - | - | - | - | - |
| cpu time | 5 | 2 | 6 | 4 |

If we have a short job, we can execute it right away.

So jobs will be executed in order: b,d,a,c

Execution times are culmulative. Meaning, if one program's exec. time is t1, then the next to arrive will execute in t1 + t2 time.

Generalizing:
Given n-jobs, with t_i being time for job i, with t_i <= t_i+1 <= t_i+2 etc.

avg. turnaround time = $\frac{\sum(\sum_{i=1}^j t_i)_{j=1}^n}{n}$

### shortest remaining time

| jobs | a | b | c | d |
| - | - | - | - | - |
| arrival time | 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 |
| CPU time | 6 | 3 | 1 | 4 |

### by priority
- job with highest priority runs first.
- this is preemptive


| processes | arrival time | CPU time | priority (highest=1)| 
| - | - | - | - |
|p1 | 0 | 10 | 3 |
|p2 | 1 | 1 | 1 |
|p3 | 2 | 2 | 3 |
|p4 | 3 | 1 | 4 |
|p5 | 4 | 5 | 2 |

