# csc332 4-8-19

# Synchronization
```
Proc 1 --> (write) Buffer <--- (read) Proc 2
```
Synchronization is needed to prevent overwrites.

### Possible flagging system
```
FLAG = buffer is free ? 0 : 1;
```
- There will then be a flag checking and setting routine.
- This will not prevent overwrites, this will not work: a common resource (flag) is still shared.

## Example of sync: Traffic light

```
   | |
   | |
---   ---
---   ---
   | |
   | |
```
- Intersection is critical (common) resource.
- Part of program that uses critical resource is called *critical area*.

```
Proc1 [crit. resource] Proc2
```

- Before moving to critical area in proc., program must ask to use crit. resource.
- There will be an entry section of critical area where permission will be asked.
- There will be an exit section after critical area.

```
Proc. N
----------
|        |
|        | <--- entry
Crit Area
--------- <--- exit
|        |
|        |
---------
```

---


### Using Job list
A job list will contain N jobs, with a single job ptr.

- Proc 1 reads job list (Job 1)
- Proc 2 reads job list (Job 1)
- Proc 1 increments list ptr.
- Proc 2 increments list ptr.

## Hardware method: Special CPU Instruction
Test-and-set instructions.
- This will guarantee buffer is not being used by more than one CPU or proc., but is dangerous with more than one proc.: deadlock, starvation can occur as busy-wait cycle occurs

```
Proc. 1
----------
|        |
|        | <--- entry
Crit Area
--------- <--- exit
|        |
|        |
---------

Proc. 2
----------
|        |
|        | <--- entry
Crit Area
--------- <--- exit
|        |
|        |
---------

Buffer
---------  (Flag)
|        |
|        |
---------
```


- There will be an algorithm in the entry section of crit. area:
```
Read F
F == 0?
	if no, Read F
	F=1
	 |
	 v
	use B
```
- This algorithm must be executed in one CPU instruction. (test-set instruction)
- This loop is called "busy waiting"
- OS doesn't know about bust waiting; deadlocks can occur

## If there is no test-and-set in CPU...
## Algorithm 2
- Let there be a single variable `turn`.
- Turn will be an integer that will signal availability of critical resource
```
for p_i
	if turn != i
		wait
	else
		enter crit. section, on exit turn = j (j is num. of next proc)
end
```

- Proc. will check if turn var. = proc N
- This loop will result in busy waiting again: OS doesn't know about busy waiting
- Control is left to user program
- Changing other processes is taxing on the system

## Algorithm 3 ("Very polite")
Given a vector of flags:
```
for p_i:
	(i = 1,2)
	flag[i] = true ? wait;
	|
	v no?
 	enter crit section
		flag[i] = false, then exit
end
```
- If both procs want crit. area, then there is indefinite waiting.

## Algorithm 4 
- Combines algo. 1 and 3
- Uses flags and turn variable
- Still has busy *waiting*

Proc j
```
FLAG[j] = true;
	|
	v
turn = i
	|
	v
if FLAG[i] = true & turn=i;
	if yes, then wait
	|
	v no
crit section
```
## Next algo: OS will sync
